---
title: 10 years of Mopidy
tags:
  - mopidy
  - python
  - mpd
  - spotify
  - gstreamer
authors:
  - jodal
---

Ten years ago today, on December 23, 2009, Mopidy was born. While chatting with
my friend and then-colleague Johannes Knutsen, we came up with the idea of
building an MPD server that could play music from Spotify instead of local
files.

This is the story of the first decade of Mopidy.

<!-- more -->

After a brief discussion of how it could work and what we could build upon,
Johannes came up with the name "Mopidy." The name is, maybe quite obviously, a
combination of the consonants from "MPD" combined with the vocals from
"Spotify." At the same time, the name is different enough from both of its
origins not to be mixed up with them. Even during the first few hours, we had
some thoughts about maybe adding file playback and support for other backends
in the future. Thus we quickly appreciated that the "Mopidy" name would still
work even if Spotify at some point might not be the sole focus of the project.

Within a couple of hours, we had a Git repo with some plans written up. We
joined the #mopidy IRC channel on Freenode, and we had recruited Thomas Adamcik
to the project. Over the next few years, he designed many of our most essential
components, including the extension system. Today, ten years later, Thomas is
still involved with Mopidy and many of its extensions.

Within a couple of days, it worked! We had built a primitive MPD server in
Python that at least worked with the Sonata MPD client. On the backend side, we
used the reverse-engineered "despotify" library to interface with Spotify, as
it already had some Python bindings available. For all three of us, coming
mostly from web development and Django, I believe we already had a feeling of
achievement and expanding horizons. If we could pull this off, we could build
anything.

The story of Mopidy is a story of thousands of small iterative improvements
that, over time, add up to something far greater than the sum of the parts. It
was a hack, but a hack with good test coverage from the very first day, making
changes and iteration safe and joyful.

In March 2010, we released our first alpha release. Over the next decade, this
would become the first of 74 releases, not counting the numerous releases of
the extensions we later extracted from Mopidy or built from the ground.

Later in 2010, as we added an alternative Spotify backend using the official
libspotify library, we started seeing the first traces of our current system
architecture. At the time, backends were something you switched by changing the
config file and restarting Mopidy. Support for having multiple backends active
at the same time wouldn't come until much later after we had built the muxing
"core layer" in-between the backend and frontend layers. However, multiple
frontends were supported from the start. The MPD server was the first frontend,
and during the first year, we added a second one with the Last.fm scrobbler.

By the end of 2011, we had made GStreamer a requirement and thrown out the
support for direct audio output to OSS and ALSA. In 2012, we built upon the
great powers of GStreamer to support multiple outputs, so that we could play
audio locally and stream it a Shoutcast/Icecast server at the same time. The
support for multiple outputs survived for about a year before we removed it.
Instead, we exposed the GStreamer pipeline configuration directly, just like we
still do today with the `audio/output` configuration. Streaming to Icecast is
still possible but is involved enough to require specific documentation for the
setup. However, by exposing the GStreamer pipeline directly, we didn't have to
guess what kind of installations people would use Mopidy in and forwarded the
power of GStreamer to the end-users.

In 2011, we added support for Python 2.7, but we for sure didn't plan to stay
with it for seven years. During the winter, I designed and built the
[Pykka](https://www.pykka.org/)
actor library based on the concurrency patterns we had established in Mopidy.
When we started using Pykka in Mopidy in March 2011, it already supported
Python 3.

Towards the end of the year, we added support for the Ubuntu Sound Menu and the
MPRIS D-Bus specification through our third frontend.

Most of 2012 went by without much happening other than a few maintenance
releases. However, in November, we released the almost revolutionary Mopidy
0.9. We had finally built out the muxing core layer in-between the frontends
and backends. Depending on the type of request from a frontend, the core layer
would either forward the request to the correct backend or, e.g., in the case
of search, fan out the request to all backends and then merge the returned
search results before passing the result back to the frontend. We had
accomplished one of our goals from the very first day of development. We had a
music server that could play music from both Spotify and local files.

Less than a month later, the wheel turned again, and we released Mopidy 0.10
with the HTTP frontend, which exposed the full Core API using JSON-RPC over a
WebSocket. With this, it was suddenly possible to build clients for Mopidy
directly, instead of going through MPD.

In a lazy and ingenious moment, we decided that we had no interest in manually
keeping the Core API and the JSON-RPC API in sync for the indefinite future.
Thus, we based the JSON-RPC API on introspection of the Core API and included a
JSON-RPC endpoint, which returned a data structure that described the full API.
On top of this, I built the [Mopidy.js](https://github.com/mopidy/mopidy.js)
library and released it together with
Mopidy 0.10. Mopidy.js used the API description data structure to dynamically
build up a mirror of the Core API in JavaScript, working both on Node.js and in
the browser.

Even as the JSON-RPC implementation and the Mopidy.js library became the
foundation for several popular Mopidy web clients over the next few years, no
bug was ever reported that originated here and not deeper down in the layers.
To this day, I testament this to two things: proper test-driven development and
excellent code review by Thomas, making these few weeks in November-December
2012 one of the heights in my years as an open source maintainer.

Jumping just a few months ahead to Easter 2013, the next revolution was about
to happen. In a single long and intense day, Thomas and I hashed out and
implemented Mopidy's extension support. Up to this point, there was just one
Mopidy. Today, a search for "mopidy" on PyPI returns 127 results.

The Stream backend was created early in 2013, and later in the year, it learned
how to parse several playlist formats to find the streamable URL they
contained. This made it easy to build backend extensions for music services
that exposed playable URIs, like SoundCloud, Google Music, and thousands of
radio stations. The backends had to find and present the playable streams as a
playlist or as a virtual file hierarchy. The heavy-lifting of actually playing
the audio could be fully delegated to Mopidy and its Stream backend.

By the end of 2013, we had performed the first round of shrinking of Mopidy's
core.
The [Spotify support](/ext/spotify/),
the [Last.fm scrobbler](/ext/scrobbler/) and
the [MPRIS server](/ext/mpris/) were all
extracted to new extensions, living outside the core project. I believe that
pulling extensions out of core has helped reduce the amount of stuff one must
juggle in one's head to effectively develop on Mopidy.

In 2013, we eased the on-ramping for new users by automatically creating an
initial configuration file on the first run. Mopidy also got support for
announcing its servers through Zeroconf, so they could be autodetected by
mobile apps, like Mopidy-Mobile.

Elsewhere in 2013, Wouter van Wijk built the first iterations of the
[Pi MusicBox](https://www.pimusicbox.com/)
distribution for Raspberry Pi. Pi MusicBox provided a turn-key jukebox
setup built on Mopidy. This made Mopidy more approachable for the masses that
didn't want to become Python and Mopidy experts to create their own hi-fi
setups.

The next year, in 2014, Fon launched a Kickstarter campaign to build a "modern
cloud jukebox" named
[Gramofon](https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/fon/gramofon-modern-cloud-jukebox).
It turned out that they based their prototype on
Mopidy, and Javier Domingo Cansino from their development team started
submitting patches and becoming active in Mopidy development.

In the summer of 2014, we had our first real-life development sprint at
EuroPython in Berlin. Javier and I were joined by several newcomers that got up
and running with Mopidy development and squashed a few bugs.

Mopidy 0.19.5 was released at Mopidy's fifth anniversary in December 2014. A
few months later, we released Mopidy 1.0. The release of Mopidy 1.0 did not
mark a breaking change, but rather the decision that we could commit to the
current APIs for a while, to help bring stability to the extension ecosystem.

In the summer of 2015, Thomas joined us as we had our second development sprint
at EuroPython in Bilbao, Javier's hometown.

The year between the sprints of 2014 and 2015, and the 0.19, 1.0, and 1.1
releases, were quite significant when looking back at the project's history.
They were not as notable in features as when we added multi-backend, the HTTP
API, and extension support back in 2012/2013. Still, they were significant in
that the project garnered lots of interest. Up to twenty different people
contributed code to each of these three releases.

More than five years ago, in July 2014,
I opened Mopidy's [issue #779](https://github.com/mopidy/mopidy/issues/779) for
tracking the port to Python 3. There were three large buckets of work that had
to be completed. First, our libspotify Python bindings had no Python 3 support.
Second, we needed to upgrade to GStreamer 1. Finally, we had to port Mopidy and
all of its extensions.

Over the next year, I rewrote [pyspotify](https://pyspotify.mopidy.com/)
from scratch using CFFI. Just a couple
of weeks before I shipped the final version, Spotify deprecated the libspotify
API. However, since they've never provided a replacement API for audio
playback, we're still using pyspotify 2 and libspotify to play music from
Spotify more than four years later.

During the autumn of 2015, I ported Mopidy from GStreamer 0.10 to 1.x.
GStreamer 0.10 was quickly being deprecated, so this work was necessary solely
for Mopidy to continue being packaged in Debian and Ubuntu. It was a nice bonus
that the new PyGObject wrapper also supported Python 3. With the release of
Mopidy 2.0 in February 2016, the move to GStreamer 1 was complete, and thanks
to Thomas, we finally supported gapless playback.

Shortly after the 2.0 release, life caught up with several of the most active
contributors, and a mix of more kids and more work threw Mopidy into a
three-year-long period with lower activity and almost exclusively maintenance
releases. The only significant development in Mopidy during this period was the
support for persisting playback and tracklist state across restarts,
contributed by Jens Lütjen, and released in 2.1 in 2017.

Jumping ahead to 2019. Five years after I wrote the tracking issue for moving
Mopidy to Python 3, the world looks quite different. Python 2.7's announced
end-of-life is looming at the end of the year, and Python 3 is the standard for
all new projects.

So, finally, in the middle of October, we got started on the third and final
step toward Python 3.

Once we had a small part of the test suite running on both Python 2 and 3, it
took Nick Steel and me about three weeks of porting one and one module before
suddenly the full test suite was running. Once Mopidy without extensions ran
well on Python 3, we sliced all Python 2 support, cleaned up all hacks left
from the porting, and reformatted the code with Black. All of a sudden, Mopidy
felt like a modern Python codebase.

The six weeks since then have mostly been spent on extensions.

We've built a new [Mopidy extension registry](/ext/).
We believe that the new registry
will ease the discovery of extensions in general. Short-term, we also hope it
will help users navigate the extension ecosystem while it is temporarily split
in two between Python 2 and 3.

As good as all extensions in the Mopidy GitHub organization are now running on
Python 3, as well as a few popular extensions elsewhere. In total, we have
almost 20 extensions compatible with Mopidy 3.0 on the day of the release.

Some extensions have also recently received some extra tender, love, and care.

The [Mopidy-Local](/ext/local/)
extension was pushed out of core early in the Python 3
porting. After becoming an independent extension, Thomas Kemmer's excellent
Mopidy-Local-SQLite and Mopidy-Local-Images were merged into Mopidy-Local. We
now have a single comprehensive extension for using Mopidy with pre-indexed
local music collections.

Next, Nick did a great job fixing up the
[Mopidy-Spotify](/ext/spotify/) extension. Since
Spotify broke the playlist part of libspotify a while ago, Mopidy-Spotify has
been without functional playlist support. It now uses the Spotify Web API for
everything related to playlists, and Nick has continued adding several new
features using the Web API. Some are shipped in the release that went out
together with Mopidy 3.0, and some are right around the corner. Once complete,
Mopidy-Spotify will support everything Mopidy-Spotify-Web provides, once again
leaving us with a single comprehensive extension for using Mopidy with Spotify.

Just a few days ago, the
[Mopidy-MPD](/ext/mpd/) frontend was pushed out to an extension
too. With this, we've come full circle from Mopidy being named after "MPD" and
"Spotify." As of Mopidy 3.0, both Mopidy-MPD and Mopidy-Spotify are independent
extensions, and Mopidy core knows nothing of either. I wasn't entirely sure
whether moving the MPD server would bring any benefits. Still, once the move
was complete, it is evident that Mopidy-MPD deserves to be a project by itself.
The split reduced the amount of code in Mopidy by 25% and cut the test suite
run time in half. Hopefully, this will make it easier for newcomers to start
contributing to either Mopidy-MPD or Mopidy itself.

Finally, December 22, the day before the Mopidy project's 10th anniversary, we
published [Mopidy 3.0](/blog/2019/12/22/mopidy-3.0/).

Together with Mopidy 3.0, we uploaded ten updated extensions to PyPI, with at
least six more having compatible pre-releases, and, hopefully, final releases
over the next few days. If you wonder what's ready for Python 3 right now, when
you read this, the [extension registry](/ext/) is the place to look.

It's still early days for Mopidy 3.0. Our
[Homebrew tap](https://github.com/mopidy/homebrew-mopidy/)
is up to date with the
new releases, and parts of Arch Linux are already up to date. Updated Debian
packages, both at
[apt.mopidy.com](https://apt.mopidy.com/) and in Debian,
are still some days away.
Nonetheless, Mopidy 3.0 will definitively be a part of Ubuntu 20.04 LTS come
spring.

Now, go forth and update your extensions to work with Python 3.7+ and Mopidy
3.0.

In a week, Python 2.7 reaches end-of-life.
Mopidy, however, is ready for the next decade.
